---
id: 80d1c4cf-0d7f-4f49-97c6-c9861c035d2c
title: 'Some great ideas there Austen!'
subtitle: 'I have had some ideas of my own:'
published: false
type: comment
original: medium
---



Some great ideas there Austen! I think Collections is really neat one in particular as I have many Favorites (Likes) that are somewhat trapped and at the same time I don’t feel it’s always appropriate for me to retweet things to all my followers.

I have had some ideas of my own:

- Make Lists interchangeable with my main timeline… I would love the ability to make a List my default view on the world — I agree with you, Lists are too hidden and underused.
- Occasionally resurface some of my old favourites back to me.
- Another level of Public List — a Publicly-Addressable List, one with the ability to @ message the list and thus notify all members — members would need a way to opt in/out of notifications. List admin could choose who gets to @ the list e.g. members only or the public. This could result in some interesting self-contained, public-facing communities.
- A way for people to ‘submit an application’ to be a part of a someone’s list would naturally follow.
- More radical: A way to manually limit how many tweets you see from an account, e.g. “At most I want to see \[5|10|25\] tweets from this account per \[minute|hour|day\]” — this would give you more control over how busy your feed gets.
- OR (instead of the above) a way to determine the difference between accounts you want to see everything from and ones that aren’t must-see, but are good to catch up on.  
    For example, let me decide: Is this account/list represent a brand, a community, or a person (and further a person I know or a person I like e.g. a celebrity). This could help provide better who-to-follow recommendations, and from Twitter’s perspective, it would be nice juicy crowd-sourced data.
- The other side to this is surfacing tweets for accounts you follow that don’t tweet very often. For example: If someone hasn’t tweeted in a while and then they tweet at 4am, I might still want to see that even though I was asleep at 4am (perhaps the ‘While you were gone’ already does this, I’m not sure.)

Perhaps these are all aimed at long-tail usage and long-term users. But they add utility which is currently missing which could bring more new users with specific use-cases.

If Twitter keeps adapting solely to increase new-user figures, it will eventually fail to resemble the product the early-adopters (probably its most vocal supporters) fell in love with and more of us will lose interest and leave it behind.

