---
id: 2c43d5cf-6c5a-4a20-ab63-ef28aad7ec56
title: 'Thanks for reading, Gabriella.'
subtitle: 'You’re right, this is just a beginning. And I really don’t offer a lot here besides the two extremes. At the end of the day, if you don’t…'
published: false
type: comment
---



Thanks for reading, Gabriella.

You’re right, this is just a beginning. And I really don’t offer a lot here besides the two extremes. At the end of the day, if you don’t want/can’t afford a decent website, don’t waste your money hiring a web design agency to design and build you something bespoke.

A lot of businesses that have budget and resources to start and manage new web projects need to buck up their ideas because nothing quality gets made on a shoestring.

However, the flip side is if your marketing plan for a fledgling business relies heavily on a web presence – and if you don’t have the surplus funds to make it really shine – then I highly recommend choosing a simpler path, such as SquareSpace (or any of the plethora of DIY website builders out there). In many cases this will give you what you need for a fraction of the cost and a lot less headache for everyone.

I even want to challenge that thinking though! Because I’m confident that, whatever your business does, there will be a way (and ultimately a need) for you to be able to do that *without* a website.

Learning what it takes to make a business excel without the automatic fallback of a website will open people’s eyes to the opportunities they’re missing when they’re frantically clicking the refresh button on their website analytics.

The best thing you can do for any business is build real, genuine relationships with real people. That breeds the kind of trust that discerning customers will be looking for when they choose to part with their hard-earned money.

That doesn’t need a website.

