---
id: 26f5784f-f60d-43a3-8e94-63e5daab7f12
title: 'Laravel: Flashing session data across multiple redirects through middleware'
subtitle: 'The middleware system introduced in Laravel 5 blows the old filters out of the water (IMHO).'
published: false
original: medium
---



### Laravel: Flashing session data across multiple redirects through middleware

The middleware system introduced in Laravel 5 blows the old filters out of the water (IMHO).

But middleware has some quirks. All things aren’t equal in the middleware world because of how early in the request lifecycle all of the middleware is registered and in some cases called.

I ran into an instance of this with a pretty simple issue, but I thought it was worth sharing.

Let’s say you’re using Session flashing to display messages after a redirect — Jeffrey Way’s excellent [Flash library](https://github.com/laracasts/flash) is the one I use.

Now let’s say you’re using a middleware to redirect users from a single entry point to the relevant location depending on some variable per user. Then let’s say the original request creates a Flash message.

When your user hits the middleware, they’ll be redirected, but the flashed data (in this case, our Flash message) will be gone for the next request, but our user won’t have seen the message.

Thankfully, Laravel has the ***reflash()*** method that can be used to easily pass session data from one request to the next. Here’s what that looks like in a controller context:

However, if you have a redirect happening inside a middleware (instead of writing the same thing as an *if* statement into every controller method or constructor), you’ll notice that it isn’t possible to use this same syntax to reflash the session data across multiple requests.

Today, I discovered how to get around this. Here it is for you, for free:

So what’s happening here? Well inside the middleware, our ***redirect()*** helper doesn’t return an object that supports the ***session()*** method. What it does have is ***getSession()***, and thankfully that does expose the ***reflash()*** method.

The difference is that this ***reflash()*** doesn’t return the main ***RedirectResponse*** object inside middleware, so it won’t work with method chaining. But if we call the method separately whilst still returning our redirect, we’ll get the desired effect without too much hassle.
