---
id: 83b70471-21d2-4ef8-8d6b-89c666ebd93e
title: 'The Web Isn’t Just Design'
subtitle: 'I’ve just finished reading Sarah Parmenter’s sombre revelation and while I think she’s absolutely right, I want to try and answer the…'
published: false
---



### The Web Isn’t Just Design

I’ve just finished reading [Sarah Parmenter’s sombre revelation](http://www.sazzy.co.uk/the-elephant-in-the-room/) and while I think she’s absolutely right, I want to try and answer the question of why this is happening and how to tackle the problem.





---



The web *design* industry is a fickle mistress. When the web was born, there was no such thing as ‘web design’ — websites were [really basic](http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/WWW/TheProject.html) and in some cases [just plain nasty](http://www.warnerbros.com/archive/spacejam/movie/jam.htm) (actually, someone did ‘design’ that).

In terms of generally-pleasing aesthetics, neither the awareness nor the capacity existed within the people or the technology to support beautifully-designed, brand-appropriate websites.

Sure designers everywhere lamented the web for its lack of beauty, and many passionate designers who believed in this web stuff pushed the boundaries enough to make a change. Thank you!

When CSS became the new hotness, suddenly designing for the internet was nowhere near as limited. Expressive rules could help define layout and style alongside the ubiquitous HTML opening the door to the possibility of near-complete separation of concerns: web developer, meet web designer.

Suddenly anyone with at least a modicum of artistic design ability and the wherewithal to operate a computer could design for the web and have their whims realised in fully interactive technicolor online.

Tales of how these ‘web designers’ were changing the world and leading the way on unbroken ground appealed to many and the number of designers increased rapidly — much like the number of Social Media Gurus who showed up a few years ago.

But these were early days and the web as a platform was yet to be fully realised. Beautiful, static pages are one thing… beautiful products are entirely different.

As Sarah pointed out, more and more companies want to emulate the high-quality finish of their more well-endowed heroes, so ‘designers’ are sought after internally. “Commoditisation of design” has played a large part in this, making it possible for many ‘normal’ folks to produce ‘good-enough’ results.

Some of these people have moved on, perhaps even to freelancing as web designers. But they have limits.

As support for dynamic pages, server-side languages, persistent user interfaces and ultimately fully-fledged web-based applications developed, design has taken its rightful place in the product lifecycle and in the annals of the industry.

I believe the world owes web design a favour: the design revolution has come about thanks in no small part to the amazing abilities of some incredible web designers.

We’re exposed to more good design than ever and hundreds of thousands of designers have been making more than a decent living off of the web for many years.

But all good things must come to a normalising plateau. Web design is one such thing. When everyone wants it (demand increases), there’s the inevitable gold rush. Then when the market is flooded, most realise there’s too much gold and the value drops (too much supply).

The downside is that like any industry finding its norms, the high-investment, high-return innovator and early adopter days are over and we’re easily well into our early majority now.

> The thing that attracted many to the industry is the very thing that their joining actively dilutes.

As Sarah mentioned, there was a time when we had to educate clients on why they needed to *be online*. By-and-large everyone is now. They get it. What they don’t get is why they should pay thousands of pounds/dollars to do so.

**It’s no longer enough to keep valuing our land based on the opportunity of what may be beneath the soil. We have to start creating value.**

So let’s move the world on:

#### Lesson 2: Why You Need Great Design.

In this lesson, we can teach that it’s not ‘just spending money on a web designer’ that will do. They need to invest in the **whole aesthetic of their business**.

> It’s never been a better time to hire people with incredible design skills in a wide variety of disciplines!

We’re in a mixed world where we still have print materials, offline advertising mediums and tactile marketing collateral *alongside* the new and innovative online and mobile websites, apps, and social network platforms.

Brand consistency, colour theory, user experience, style guides, information architecture — these are all cross-discipline principles that need attention for businesses to present the best version of themselves.

A good designer will be able to guide on all of these fronts and set the tone for your organisation, whether they work for an agency, come into you as a contractor, or you choose to employ them directly.

Of course, this works in tandem with good programming, PR &amp; marketing, leadership, hiring and on and on.

Yes the work probably is drying up for a lot of people. But it’s more complicated than just ‘companies are hiring internally’ or ‘theme factories are churning out cheap templates’.

It certainly doesn’t mean that there is lack of opportunity. We’ve finally got to a point where almost all businesses are now on a level playing field — true **democratisation of opportunity**.

If you can provably bring just one of them value enough to justify the salary/income you expect, go do it!

So to you designers whose work is drying up: like the farmers, **diversify**!

To you companies: hire a great designer today! The potential of what good design can bring to your company is incredible.