---
id: d2d0e926-4881-43d2-8765-ee045e31ebe7
title: 'Getting the Balance Right'
subtitle: '-'
published: false
---

#### Why it’s not just work-life balance that needs to be right to keep you happy and successful





























Photo: Get the Balance Right by [Marquette LaForest](https://www.flickr.com/photos/marquette/ "Go to Marquette LaForest's photostream")



---



I’m going to let you into a little secret. Actually this secret is pretty widely known. In fact it’s something we’re ‘taught’ extremely early on. Everything we witness as time drags us through existence is a product of this secret.

It’s a subject that crosses all boundaries — physical, philosophical, social, economic, scientific and more. Yet, while we feel, and often benefit from its effects, it seems we rarely put it into practice.

> **Balance is essential to life.**

A minor imbalance in any number of universal, global, radioactive, electromagnetic, microscopic and subatomic measurements can detrimentally impact the quality of life as you know it.





---



Goldilocks (or Silver-Hair, or the little old lady, or whoever it happens to be in your incarnation of it) appreciated things that were *just right*. Not too hot or cold; not too big or small; not too hard or soft… all just somewhere in the middle.

Yes **balance is everything**. It is *the* key. And getting it right is what will make you truly happy.

#### Physical Balance

It can be easy to fall into the trap of thinking that physical balance is simply a natural process. That somehow things that are in order and harmony with each other would naturally get that way.

However, in everything that we can observe that displays a sense of equilibrium, we see that balance doesn’t ‘just happen’. It takes effort for balance to occur and remain. Sometimes at great cost.

See if you can make a pen balance on its nib just by throwing it on the table… frustratingly difficult — impossible even considering the odds.

The odd thing is, when something is perfectly balanced, it has the appearance of it being so effortless. We perhaps don’t consider the time and energy spent in getting things to balance.

Of course, balance as a physical trait for most of our day to day needs comes naturally to the majority of us. But very few of us can truly exhibit a control over balance quite like Miyoko Shida Rigolo:

Worth watching to the end if you have time. Truly phenomenal#### Emotional Balance

I recently watched *The Walk* (Robert Zemeckis). It was a compelling film. I was on the edge of my seat at times.

Ultimately I thought it was lacking something, especially as it meandered towards American self-pity. I couldn’t connect emotionally with the obsessive and obnoxious Frenchman, despite his intentional likableness.

What was it about him that frustrated me? When I realised the answer, it became the most important aspect of the film for me. It was his obvious prowess in the aspect of physical balance contrasted against the complete lack of emotional stability — balance in his aspirations and personal relationships.

He throws himself fully into his work. His view towards his ‘friends’ seems to be solely centred around what he can gain from them by way of support. Once they’ve done what he needed them for, they are no longer necessary.

His girlfriend even spells it out for him in the ‘night-before’ scene where he frantically hammers shut a box of materials needed for his big walk — he doesn’t care about his friends.

This has little impact though and one-by-one he lets go of everyone who has helped him achieve this feat — even his apparent soulmate.

#### Spiritual Balance

We all have a spiritual aspect, even if we choose not to acknowledge  
Without balancing it

#### Economic Balance