---
id: f42c7276-86db-4d03-b41b-2a2e73026b2f
title: Network
subtitle: 'Privacy: one of the major issues of our generation. As capitalism and centralisation have choked the ideals of an open and fair web, we’re…'
published: false
---



### Network

Privacy: one of the major issues of our generation. As capitalism and centralisation have choked the ideals of an open and fair web, we’re scrambling to keep something that’s usable.

A sub-genre, if you will, of the Internet Era — The Personalisation Age has led to massive exploitation and abuse of highly sensitive personal data, dramatically increasing individual’s risk to fraud and more.

Slowly, but surely, we seem to be moving (regressing?) into The Privacy Age — a period marked perhaps as a coming-of-age for the Internet, but certainly as the dampener on the unfettered gathering of personal data.

Some recent developments that highlight this shift:

- Demand for improved ownership rights and publishing freedoms — I nodded all the way through [this article](https://www.neustadt.fr/essays/against-a-user-hostile-web/) by Parimal Satyal.
- Well-documented scandals of abuse of personal information by gated communities and their ‘associated entities’.
- Attempted repeals of Net Neutrality and related laws thinly veiled as ways to ‘guarantee fair access’ which are blatant political weapons, quickly abused to increase revenues at the expense of usability and privacy by clamping and controlling what users see and do online.
- Whilst on the other side, legislation in support of better controls around consumer information and data privacy, especially, for example, [GDPR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation) in the EU.

That’s just a smidgeon.

On a more personal level, I’ve noticed that my attendance on certain social networks has waned. Perhaps this is subconsciously in response to all this nonsense.

The fact is, I almost never go on Facebook any more. I also have become infrequent on Instagram. Twitter is about the only one I regularly still use for now. I’ve actually started more on Reddit of late, but I have to admit that’s for less intellectual/social reasons — I just love [/r/funny](https://www.reddit.com/r/funny/).

There are probably a few reasons for this.

I’m no privacy ‘freak’ (I mean this in the nicest possible way): Despite revelations, leaks, hacks, papers etc etc suggesting large-scale government surveillance tapping various online networks, I don’t consider myself a big enough target for that to make me switch from Google to [DuckDuckGo](https://medium.com/@duckduckgo/google-alternatives-e6b3d8f40de2), or to go back to Firefox. Sorry, Edward.

Honestly, I’m tiring of the persistent and generally irrelevant advertising that has come to dominate almost everything I look at. And I hate the fact that their utility is intentionally broken in favour of [capturing more and more of our attention](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/nov/09/facebook-sean-parker-vulnerability-brain-psychology) so that they can cream more $$$ from our data and our eyeballs.

> If your service is useful, I will pay you real money so that I can use it without you stealing my identity

Tied up with that is my belief that the advertising model is fundamentally broken. It’s a big egg going bad, so much so that even Google is desperately preparing other baskets to fill with other eggs as the industry steadily catches up to what they no doubt have known for a long time.

Advertisers want more, but consumers want less. The returns are diminishing and the consumers are getting weary.

> [](https://twitter.com/kneath/status/1004042191642116097)

Basically, all of this bubbling around in my brain got me thinking: I still find the concept of a social network useful. I wish there was a social network that *I* could control. My *own* application/site that was easy to set up and still had all of the utility of the big networks but all of the control/privacy of a personal website.

I’ve come across some attempts at what this essentially is — a federated social network. I was introduced to Mastodon a while ago. I have some problems with the way this works and I think fundamentally it doesn’t really change much. I’m still handing my data over to someone else… possibly even more people than before. Not ideal.

**Enter** [**Network**](https://github.com/simonhamp/network)**.**

It’s not much right now, but it’s a beginning. And some of the prep work I’ve been doing led me down some dark/dimly-lit alleyways that were begging for some Illuminate-tion. (If you get this pun, let’s be friends.)