---
id: a59ae751-6ebb-40b4-8ff6-785f6d81f6ca
title: 'So you want to version-control your content.'
subtitle: 'You develop the site locally, you commit your changes as appropriate and you deploy to production. It’s all there, it all Just Works™. It’s…'
published: false
original: medium
---



###   


So you want to version-control your content. You’ve heard about [Statamic](https://statamic.com/) (or another [flat-file CMS](https://github.com/ahadb/flat-file-cms)) and you love the idea of the flat-file approach. You’ve drunk the Kool-Aid and you get all of your content into git.

You develop the site locally, you commit your changes as appropriate and you deploy to production. It’s all there, it all Just Works™. It’s magical. You can edit your content on GitHub (other version control service providers are available), you can work on multiple machines, with multiple people, all seeing the same content. No databases to lug around and keep in sync. Less time wrangling exports and imports; more time snoozing and schmoozing.

But then the client or the business decides they can’t rely on one person, or even a group of people, with git skills and access to update the website. They need access to that sweeeeeet Control Panel — the back-office, the CP, the admin.

Well, that spells disaster for your beautiful git workflow. But! Lo, Statamic has [**git integration baked in**](https://statamic.dev/git-integration) so changes on the server can be committed and pushed straight up to git 🎉 Delicious!

Ok, hang up. That’s fine if your site now becomes the *only* place where content changes are made and the dev environments or version control service is really only for editing the code of the site — templates, modules etc — otherwise you might run into merge issues that need to be resolved *on the production environment* 😡

Of course, if you’re very careful, you might not bump into this. You might only face this off in your local environment. But what if you did experience it on production? Then what?

Well then you’d have to either `--force` when you `pull` or you’d have to do manual merging on the server, probably over SSH. Forcing on pull is kinda dangerous — you could lose changes and end up *forcing* someone else to repeat their work.

Manually
