---
id: 135d246c-5da9-474a-afa9-2d927a5a4fef
title: 'Kayla’s Tears'
subtitle: 'I’ve just finished watching Making a Murderer. Spoilers ahead.'
published: false
original: medium
---



### Kayla’s Tears

I’ve just finished watching *Making a Murderer*. **Spoilers ahead.**

Aside of being a brilliantly gripping, emotional rollercoaster that has stirred and disturbed me like no other fact or fiction I’ve yet been presented, it also thoroughly disgusted me beyond belief.

The level of injustice that has been presented within is off the charts.

In both trials related to the death of Teresa Halbach, the sheer lack of physical evidence is shocking. That any jury could find a single person guilty on the cumulative evidence presented at both of these trials is beyond the realms of logic.

Why does this disgust me? Well it’s not like my barometer of justice has had its indicator set wrong.

Someone killed that poor woman for sure. But (as I’m sure many of you agree) there is absolutely no way that the body of proof that the prosecution attempted to present in both trials conclusively points to Brendan and Steve as being the perpetrators of this crime.

The police and residents (who made up the juries) in Manitowoc and the other counties are clearly either too stupid or too biased to see things objectively.

#### Making a Mockery

Demos and \[\] have framed and edited the story well, and for such they’ve been accused (by the prosecutors) of leaving out relevant evidence from their documentary.

I have read all of these statements and researched all of the public evidence I can get my hands on and would like to present my full discussion here.

I feel that there are some important lessons from this sad story and will work my way through showing them.

#### The ‘Evidence’

Besides actual problems with the physical evidence and how it matched up (or didn’t) with the supposed events surrounding the murder, there were massive issues around motive of the police (the timing of events is impeccable) and the overreaching of the Manitowoc County Sheriff's Department (obvious conflict of interest with Steven’s civil suit) despite stating that they wouldn’t be involved is diabolical.

There are major issues with statements from Colborn and Lenk as highlighted in the documentary. Bobby and his step-dad’s alibis of each other is suspect. The \[step-dad’s\] inconsistent statement about the size of the fire.

Then there’s the highly convenient things like Teresa’s ex-boyfriend handing cameras to just the right people and her brother accessing (and possibly deleting) some of her voicemails.

Let’s just go through some of the problems with the evidence presented:

- Inconclusive EDTA in blood from SUV — the (rushed) test that the FBI created
- The potential contamination of the DNA test (note: not necessarily from blood) found on ‘the bullet’ (yes, that ONE bullet)
- That this bullet wasn’t found until March 2006
- The fact that the contaminated test of this bullet should be officially marked as ‘inconclusive’ (according to protocol) and in her only action of this sort in her entire career, \[name CSI\], pushed it through as a positive match
- The inexplicable conclusion that any DNA (blood or otherwise) in the RAV4 supposedly belonging to Teresa
- The bones not showing any signs of being moved despite their distributed location around the Avery’s
- The RAV4 being covered with branches and panels when the crusher could’ve been used — it’s like it was driven in and covered
- That a small bonfire was used to attempt to disintegrate of a body when there is an incinerator on site
- Hood latch DNA only appeared AFTER Branden ‘confesses’
- Why did Colborn run the plate and suggest that Wiegert told it to him? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KpsRtPCWHoM> — just to confirm what another cop tells him? He didn’t do that in ‘95.

Wiegert, Lenk, Fassbender, Willis, Kocourek, Kachinsky, Kratz, Colborn,

([https://www.reddit.com/r/MakingaMurderer/comments/40ncvt/len\_kachinsky\_impressions\_from\_a\_public\_defender/](https://www.reddit.com/r/MakingaMurderer/comments/40ncvt/len_kachinsky_impressions_from_a_public_defender/) — who’s side are you on?)

Questions that I would still like to get answers to:

- Is it proven conclusively that the bones that were supposedly found in the burn pit and other locations at the Avery’s are Teresa’s?
- \[name of defense’s expert witness\] Has the EDTA test been repeated? Will it be?
- Is the blood found in the RAV4 attributed to Teresa provably hers? Is there some outside source of her DNA that’s been used to confirm it was from her?
- Were Mike Halbach and Ryan Hillegas allowed on the Avery site after the SUV discovery?

- The \*67 call issue — was it really Steven? Could it have been someone else on the property/using his phone?

So who killed Teresa? Ex-boyfriend. Why? He’s

“People who are innocent don’t confess” — oppose

#### The Most Telling Part

Kayla’s tears

#### Reputations Hurt

#### My Theory

There’s major collusion going on here and an obvious class war in Manitowoc
