---
id: 43a48f5a-9803-419a-b4db-87e541ecc207
blueprint: article
title: "It's not just me, then!"
tags:
  - twitter
meta_description: "I'm not the only one experiencing the decline"
updated_by: 104b2029-6d10-4bee-9cce-a70842d2f673
updated_at: 1695922814
---
I don't want to hapr on about Twitter's downfall as a medium for people to connect, but... [as I mentioned](/blog/the-waning-reach-of-twitter) a few weeks ago, the situation is pretty bad right now.

For a while, I truly believed it was just me, but over the past few weeks I've been picking up a vibe fromjust a few people I follow:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I would really like to interact more with others here. But the feed is totally useless for some weeks:<br><br>About 90% of my feed is filled with people I don‘t know. All tweets from random brands, indie hackers sharing their success, engagement bait and US politics - which I am not…</p>&mdash; Tobias_Petry.sql (@tobias_petry) <a href="https://twitter.com/tobias_petry/status/1704378663624429786?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 20, 2023</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I&#39;m not here primarily to increase Twitter followers, but I&#39;m curious why follower growth would consistently decelerate, while I post exactly the same way the whole time -- timing, mixture of short and long, responding consistently.<br><br>Theories? <a href="https://t.co/DmnLEfhXxc">pic.twitter.com/DmnLEfhXxc</a></p>&mdash; Jason Cohen (@asmartbear) <a href="https://twitter.com/asmartbear/status/1703868580599681312?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 18, 2023</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Engagement and reach on Twitter has been noticeably low over the past month. I haven&#39;t been consistently active every day for a couple of months, it appears that accounts may be penalised for reduced activity. Is anyone else experiencing this?</p>&mdash; James 🤌🏻 (@jamesm) <a href="https://twitter.com/jamesm/status/1701333890059628781?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 11, 2023</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">(I should use an emoji to preface a trigger warning to run the playbook and maximise the reach.)<br><br>So much of social has devolved to a place that lacks authenticity, sincerity and connection.<br><br>I can’t tell who has an agenda (or what it is), what they’re selling and/or how much…</p>&mdash; adii (@adii) <a href="https://twitter.com/adii/status/1704223707701358888?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 19, 2023</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I’m probably making the jump to the blue sky thingy over the next few months. Twitters been amazing in my life, but the paywall is too much. I don’t trust them with my card!<br><br>I can be found in other places with the handle “JamieAndLion” :)</p>&mdash; Jamie + Lion (@JamieKnight) <a href="https://twitter.com/JamieKnight/status/1704243407722287262?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 19, 2023</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Sometimes it feels like a shadowban, like so little interaction compared to a year ago 🤷🏻‍♂️ I also noticed some of my tweets get a preview / Twitter card while others don’t for some reason. Have you noticed anything like this when posting links?</p>&mdash; Philo Hermans (@Philo01) <a href="https://twitter.com/Philo01/status/1706434905809306080?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">September 25, 2023</a></blockquote>

<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

What do you think? Are you experiencing something similar?