content/collections/pages/open-source.md, before:

---
id: 72d9e39a-e775-4a2f-92c1-a302639700c4
blueprint: pages
title: 'Open Source'
updated_by: 104b2029-6d10-4bee-9cce-a70842d2f673
updated_at: 1691140188
---
## 🆓 <a href="https://nativephp.com/" target="_blank">NativePHP</a>

<small>NativePHP is a new way to build native apps using the tools you already know and love: Laravel, HTML, CSS and JavaScript on top of Electron or Tauri.</small>

## 🆓 Laravel Nova CSV Import (<a href="https://github.com/simonhamp/laravel-nova-csv-import" target="_blank">simonhamp/laravel-nova-csv-import</a>)

<small>A fully-fledged CSV and Excel import tool for [Laravel Nova](https://nova.laravel.com). Built on top of the excellent [Laravel Excel](https://laravel-excel.com).</small>

## 💰 Gitamic (<a href="https://marketplace.anystack.sh/item/gitamic" target="_blank">Statamic Add-on</a>)

<small>A premium [Statamic](https://statamic.com) add-on that lets you manage a git repository from your CP.</small>

### Contributions

<small>I try to contribute features and fixes to various open source projects that I use. Here are some of the highlights (nothing groundbreaking!):</small>

- [laravel/framework](https://github.com/laravel/framework/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [laravel/envoy](https://github.com/laravel/envoy/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [statamic/cms](https://github.com/statamic/cms/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [tighten/laravel-mix-jigsaw](https://github.com/tighten/laravel-mix-jigsaw/commits?author=simonhamp)

<p>
    <small>
      Please support my work by <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/simonhamp" target="_blank">sponsoring me on GitHub</a>.
  <br>
      My current goal is to reach _just_ $100/month
  	</small>
</p>

Commit message:

Improve open source page (and content licensing)

content/collections/pages/open-source.md, after:

---
id: 72d9e39a-e775-4a2f-92c1-a302639700c4
blueprint: pages
title: 'Open Source'
updated_by: 104b2029-6d10-4bee-9cce-a70842d2f673
updated_at: 1694435080
---
## 🆓 <a href="https://nativephp.com/" target="_blank">NativePHP</a>

NativePHP is a new way to build native apps using the tools you already know and love: Laravel, HTML, CSS and JavaScript on top of Electron or Tauri.

## 🆓 <a href="https://github.com/simonhamp/laravel-nova-csv-import" target="_blank">Laravel Nova CSV Import</a>

A fully-fledged CSV and Excel import tool for [Laravel Nova](https://nova.laravel.com). Built on top of the excellent [Laravel Excel](https://laravel-excel.com).

## 💰 <a href="https://gitamic.simonhamp.me/" target="_blank">Gitamic</a>

A premium [Statamic](https://statamic.com) add-on that lets you manage your Statamic site's Git repository from your CP.

## 🆓 <a href="https://github.com/simonhamp/dotme" target="_blank">This site</a>

You can see everything on this site over on GitHub: grab it, re-work it, do what you want. Just remember the content itself has a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/), so if you choose to re-publish or-re-work it, you must afford others the same opportunity.


### Contributions

I try to contribute features and fixes to various open source projects that I use. Here are some of the highlights (nothing groundbreaking!):

- [laravel/framework](https://github.com/laravel/framework/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [laravel/envoy](https://github.com/laravel/envoy/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [statamic/cms](https://github.com/statamic/cms/commits?author=simonhamp)
- [tighten/laravel-mix-jigsaw](https://github.com/tighten/laravel-mix-jigsaw/commits?author=simonhamp)

Please support my work by <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/simonhamp" target="_blank">sponsoring me on GitHub</a>.
  
My current goal is to reach _just_ $100/month
